---
layout: default
title:  "Default Electron deficient compounds, the heavier transition metals and the f-block"
categories: inorganic
---

<script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
<script id="MathJax-script" async src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js"></script>

# Electron deficient compounds

## What are the differences between cages and clusters? How are they classified?
Cages have 5n electrons. Electron precise. Described by 2c-2e bonding.

Clusters are held together by electron deficient, delocalised bonding.

Open cages have between 5n and 6n electrons.

Rings have 6n electrons.

Chains have greater than 6n electrons.

## Describe the cluster bonding of the s-block.
More suitable described by ionic interaction (90%). e.g. [MeLi]$$_4$$. 1 electron gives 8 total. 24 bonds in cage. Therefore 1/3 bond order. However, relatively meaningless when we consider that the bonding is truly ionic.

## Draw the MOs of [B$$_6$$H$$_6$$]$$^{2-}$$
sp exo go to form BH bonds.
endo sp form (n+1)$$^{th}$$ orbital. 
Side-on overlap of p (incl. with sp) form the t1u orbitals.
Head-on overlap of p form the t2g orbitals.

## What are Wade's rules?
Electron counting to determine whether structures are closo, nido or arachno (or hypho)
Number of bonding pairs remains the same after removal of vertex.

## Define isovalent, isoelectronic and isolobal.
Isovalent - same number of valence electrons
Isoelectronic - same number of core and valence electrons
Isolobal - fragments which contribute the same number of orbitals to a molecule.  

## What is the v+x-12 rule
v is number of valence electrons\
x is number of electrons available from ligand\
-12 is subtracting electrons from the six unavailable orbitals - 3 orbitals low-lying, 3 involved to bond to ligands

## Electron counting for carboranes

## Which are the kinetic and thermodynamic isomers for carboranes?

## Electron counting for Zintl compounds?
Use isolobal strategy

## What is the challenge from electron counting in Zintl compounds?
Intact polyhedra (relatively spherical) tend to be more stable.

## Synthesis of main group clusters
### B$$_2$$H$$_6$$
Lab:
NaBH$$_4$$ and I$$_2$$
Industrial
180 $\degrees C$
Reduction of BF$$_3$$ with NaH

### Precursors to higher boranes
3 primary methods

Gas: B$$_2$$H$$_6$$


Liquid: BH$$_3$$$$\cdot$$THF


Solid: [B$$_3$$H$$_8$$]$$^{-}$$
This is formed by reaction of previous 2 compounds with NaBH$$_4$$ and Na respectively. Second route does not generate hydrogen.


## Routes to closo clusters?
i) Thermolysis in presence of BH$$_3$$.
ii) Thermolysis of borate (e.g. sodium)

Higher temperature drives off more H$$_2$$ as it is entropically favoured.

## Carborane synthesis?
Use C$$_2$$H$$_2$$. Ligand initially complex and H$$_2$$ removed (so e- count goes up by 2). L$$_2$$ then replaced by C$$_2$$H$$_2$$. 

The higher the temperature, the more separated the C atoms become. Favours more B-C interactions. 



## Describe the important reactions of boranes. 
### Oxidation
Heat. Evolves H$$_2$$.

### Reduction


### Cage cleavage
Uses nitrogen base. 

Small base gives heterolytic cleavage.
Large base gives homolytic. 

### Deprotonation 
Bridging hydrogen removed

### Electrophilic substitution
Reaction with halogen removes a proton.
#### What is important about nido boranes?
Give apically substitututed product in presence of Lewis base. Changes to basally substituted via base-swing mechanism.

### Reaction with transition metal fragments
Removes BH or H$$_2$$.

### How are Zintl ions formed?
Reduction of p-block elements with alkali metal ions



### Identifying boranes?

### IR
Free CO - 2143cm$$^{-1}$$
Terminal CO hasa highest shift, followed by $$\mu_2$$ (1850-1750), $$\mu_3$$, etc.

Terminal B-H 2500 (middle of range)
Bridging B-H 1650 (middle of range)

### NMR
Difference in spin for 11B and 10B. Different abundances too. 

<h1>The Heavier Transition Metals</h1>


## Why are 2nd and 3rd row metal complexes largely diamagnetic?

- Cluster shapes 


- Bond order 

## Why is the 3rd IE so high for transition metals?
f-orbitals are poor at shielding, meaning s-orbitals feel greater nuclear charge than expected.


## Proof of the $$\delta$$ bond?
Staggered conformation of ligands minimises repulsion, but in presence of $$\Delta$$ bond they are more likely to be eclipsed to improve overlap.

## Are metal complexes with axial ligands stronger or weaker? Why?
Weaker, as some of the e- density is donated into the $$\delta$$ antibonding orbital.


## M-M multiple bonding
- Diffuse orbitals
- Available valence electrons
- Ox states not too high 
- Small or bridging ligands 

## Why are first row TMs in high oxidation states strongly oxidising? (relates to M-L bonding)
Wish to accept electrons into vacated t2g orbitals.
The metal is contracted after ionisation. The high ionisation energy is not compensated by M-L $$\pi$$ back-donation.
 
Higher oxidation states more readily accessed by 2nd and 3rd row, which are in turn stabilised by M-L $$\pi$$ back-donation.


## Other types of M-M bonding




## Pt chain compounds



<h1> The f-block: Lanthanoids and actinoids </h1>

## Describe the key points relating to the bonding of lanthanoids and actinoids.
4f-orbitals of lanthanoids are relatively contracted and do not contribute to bonding.\
Early Ac: 5f-orbitals more expanded, as 7s-orbitals are lowered in energy due to relativistic effects. Hence, able to partake in covalent bonding,\
Late Ac: tendency to partake in ionic interactions\

Low ox-state Ln have more expanded 4f and so may covalently bond. 

## Why are 6s filled ahead of 4f and 5d?
Diffuse orbitals. More repulsion in f.

## What are the anomalies to metallic bonding in terms of radii?
Ce lower. Partial 4f involvement in conduction band.

Eu and Yb higher due to Zeff. 

## Draw the boundary surfaces for the f-orbitals. 
Remember there are two sets: a general and a cubic.


General: like cubic described below, but the $$\pm 1$$ and $$\pm 3$$ cases have 3 nodal planes to make a 'hexagon' in terms of angles between planes (60$$\degree$$).

Cubic: $$m_l$$ = $$\pm$$3 looks like z$$^2$$ with extra ring (so does $$m_l$$=0). Others look like xz/yz/xz with extra nodal plane across plane. 

## What is the preferred oxidation state of f-block elements in the gas phase?
Interestingly enough, -1, as the electron affinity is positive. Otherwise, zero, as energy is required for ionisation.


## Explain the trends in 3rd ionisation energy for the lanthanoids.
Three classical terms predict that the IE3 values increase linearly. 

Quantum mechanical factors:
- Hund's first rule increases the mini-trends as exchange energy increases the ionisation energy
- Hund's second rule: Removing electron with different sign of angular momentum to remaining electrons is easier.

## What is the preferred oxidation state for Ce at low pH and high pH? How does this compare to higher pH?
Ce(III) preferred at low pH, but at high pH H$$_2$$O dissociates to form oxide anions, which mean that Ce(IV) is present. 


## Describe the significance of radius ratios
Later Ln experience greater contraction. Decreases $$r^+$$, which makes lower coordination more likely.

## What is significant about the f-block ionic solids?
Lattice energy estimated using Kapustinskii equation.

    (III) ox state most stable. 


## Describe the LnI$$_2$$ compounds
Semimetallic propertiees of high conductivity and lustre.
Not simple ionic compound - Ln is in (III) ox state (4f electron transferred to 5d so that it joins the conduction band).


## Describe the (IV) oxidation state of lanthanoids
Ce, Pr and Nd, as well as Tb and Dy.

Nd and Dy form fluorides
Pr and Tb form fluorides and dioxides.



## Describe how the f-block elements may be separated and isolated.
Redox chemistry separates Ce and Eu.

Froth flotation concentrates lanthanoids from ore.

Liquid-liquid extraction purifies them.

Acidification removes Th.

Ion exchange chromatography separates metals.

Electrolysis of molten halides purifies them. 

## Describe the organometallics of the lanthanoids.
Largely ionic. 

Anhydrous LnCl$$_3$$ reacts with Grignard or alkyllithium reagents.

XRD suggests that the metals bond to O-donor solvents (which may be removed by sublimation).

The Ln alkyls are very reactive and the chlorides are regenerated when reacting with a TM chloride such as FeCl$$_3$$.


## Describe the covalent bonding of actinoids.

UO$$_2^{2+}$$ - orbitals involved:
5f, 6d, 5f and 6d.
z$$^2$$ and yz/xz-type f-orbitals 















