---
layout: post
title:  "High Resolution Molecular Spectroscopy"
categories: physical
---

<!---  https://katex.org/docs/autorender.html -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.css" integrity="sha384-Um5gpz1odJg5Z4HAmzPtgZKdTBHZdw8S29IecapCSB31ligYPhHQZMIlWLYQGVoc" crossorigin="anonymous">
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.js" integrity="sha384-YNHdsYkH6gMx9y3mRkmcJ2mFUjTd0qNQQvY9VYZgQd7DcN7env35GzlmFaZ23JGp" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/contrib/auto-render.min.js" integrity="sha384-vZTG03m+2yp6N6BNi5iM4rW4oIwk5DfcNdFfxkk9ZWpDriOkXX8voJBFrAO7MpVl" crossorigin="anonymous"
    onload="renderMathInElement(document.body);"></script>
## A good reminder - how do we convert between units?

Joules to Hz : divide by h \
Joules to cm$$^{-1}$$ : divide by 100ch \
Hz to cm$$^{-1}$$ : divide by 2 $$\pi \tilde{c}$$

(use the equations. e.g. $$E/h = \nu$$)

Population $$\propto (2J+1)exp(-E_J/kT)$$

## Why is spontaneous emission required as a process to explain equilibrium?

According to theory, $$B_{ij} = B_{ji}$$ when the degeneracies of each level are the same. According to the equation for the rate of change of particles at level t, this would suggest that $$n_i = nj$$, which is not the case according to the Boltzmann distribution.

## Outline the three types of linewidth broadening

### Natural line broadening
Lifetime of state depends on rate of spontaneous emission
### Collision (pressure) broadening

### Doppler broadening

$$\frac{\Delta\nu_{doppler}}{\nu}  = \frac{1}{c}\left\frac{2k_B T ln2}{m}\right^{(1/2)}$$




## Explain the Stark effect

- Molecule rotating about axis with angulular momentum quantum number **J** ($$\sqrt{J(J+1)}\hbar$$). Projected onto the a axis with number **K**. 
- Dipole precesses around **J**. Only component of dipole parallel to **J** survives.
- $$\alpha$$ is angle between **J** and $$\mu$$. $$\beta$$ is angle between E and **J**.
- $$\mu_J = \mu \cdot cos(\alpha)$$
- $$cos(\alpha) = \frac{K}{\sqrt{KJ(J+1)}\hbar}$$
- $$E_{Stark} = - \mu_JE cos(\beta)$$
- $$cos(\beta) = \frac{M_J}{\sqrt{J(J+1)}\hbar}$$

## Explain K-stacks. Why are they different for oblate and prolate symmetric tops?
K is the angular momentum about the unique axis.

For prolate, A>B (where A is the rot. const. for the unique axis). Hence, as K increases the energy increases.

For oblate, A<B, meaning the energy decreases as K increases.

Remember, J cannot be less than K (as K takes integer steps to J). 
 
## How does Raman spectroscopy work?

Incident photons interact with molecule. Light emerges in all directions from sample as it is 'scattered'. When the emergent light has a different frequency to the original light, this is Raman scattering.

### Semi-classical description.
Electric field of laser light distorts electron density of molecule. Produces induced dipole, which relies on the anisotropy of the molecule. 

induced dipole $$= \alpha\cdot E_{field} \cdot sin (\omega_L t)$$

$$\alpha = \alpha(0) + \alpha(1)sin(2 \omega_r t)$$

where $$\omega_R$$ is the angular speed of rotation.


### Why do molecular vibrations give rise to Raman scattering?
Vibration involves change in electron density of molecule. 

## What is the use of the depolarisation ratio?

$$\rho = \frac{I∟}{I //}$$

$$0 \leq \rho \leq \frac{3}{4}$$

Totally symmetric modes close to zero value. These are known as *polarised* bands.





## Short notes on Raman
Near-IR light used so that it is not absorbed by molecules.

Change in frequency is negative for Stokes lines.

As J increases in the S-branch, the amount of energy absorbed becomes greater. Hence, the measured wavenumber becomes smaller.

I expect spacing between rotational levels to decrease with higher $$\nu$$, as greater vibration leads to greater bond length and $$B \propto \frac{1}{r^2}$$

For a Stokes line in rot-vib, the laser light will 'lose' the energy corresponding to the frequency of the pure vibrational transition, and the frequency corresponding to the increase in rotational level.


## Important note on Franck-Condon

If the ground state (or lower energy) PE curve has a smaller $$r_e$$, transitions to a greater number of $$\nu$$ states are possible, but with a low intensity. However, due to the shallow nature of PE curves at greater separation, if the ground state PE curve has a greater $$r_e$$ value, possible $$\nu$$ states are lower, although the Franck-Condon factor will be higher for the particular state that aligns nicely. 


## Rot/vib/elec spectra

Higher value of B -> lower value of r. If $$\Delta$$B >0, the higher state has a shorter bond length. The band-head is in the P-branch. \
If $$\Delta$$B <0, the higher state has a greater bond length. Given the maths of the equations, the band-head is in the R-branch. 


## Contrast the strong- and weak-field approaches to TM electronic spectroscopy.

Strong field - dominant interaction is between ligands and metal \
Weak field - dominant interaction is electron-electron repulsion. Interaction with ligands is only small perturbation. 

## What is the difference between a progression and a sequence?
Progression is from the same initial or to the same final state.
Sequence is the same change in value.

## What is pre-dissociation?
If bound and unbound higher electronic states cross, there may be a radiationaless transition to the unbound state. Short lifetime of initial excited state leads to linewidth broadening.

## What is the Birger-Sponer equation?

$$D_0 = \sum_{\nu=0} \Delta G(\nu + \frac{1}{2})

## Explain band-heads


## Why are electronic spectra of molecules larger than diatomics more complex?
More vibrational fine structure from greater number of normal modes.

## What is the difference between fluroescence and phosphorescence. 
Phosphorescence persists when the excitation is removed, whereas fluoresence does not.
(Both processes are the emission of light of a longer wavelength from a source of shorter wavelength. Spontaneous emission from ground vib. state after efficient relaxation through vibrational states).

## What does it mean for absorption and fluorescence spectra to be relatively symmetric in appearance?
Similar equilibrium geometries in ground and excited state.

## What are the effects of solvents on fluorescence?
Solvent geometry after absorption is initially same as S$$_0$$ state. After relaxation to the optimal S$$_1$$ solvent geometry (due to the change in electron distribution), the energy lowers. Hence, the fluorescence wavelength is longer than expected. Helps when considering protein environments.

## Why does phosphorescence persist?
The phosphorescence is from a triplet state. Triplet state population from an _intersystem crossing_ from the excited singlet state.

However, the transition to the ground state is forbidden by the spin selection rule, meaning it is slower. However, this selection rule break down with spin-orbit coupling.

## How is the fluorescence lifetime measured?
Measure intensity of fluorescence after the pulsed light is removed. This will allow the rate to be determined.

## How can [S$$_1$$] be found?
Use steady-state approximation. This can then be used in the calculation for the quantum yield of fluorescence.

## What is a quencher?
Molecule used to collide with an excited state molecule to lower its energy. Molecules typically used have unpaired electrons or polarisable atoms.

## What is the usefulness of fluorescence resonance energy transfer?
Can infer distances from acceptor and donor. Process is non-radiative.








