---
layout: post
title:  Diffraction methods in chemistry
categories: physical
---

<!---  https://katex.org/docs/autorender.html -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.css" integrity="sha384-Um5gpz1odJg5Z4HAmzPtgZKdTBHZdw8S29IecapCSB31ligYPhHQZMIlWLYQGVoc" crossorigin="anonymous">
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.js" integrity="sha384-YNHdsYkH6gMx9y3mRkmcJ2mFUjTd0qNQQvY9VYZgQd7DcN7env35GzlmFaZ23JGp" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/contrib/auto-render.min.js" integrity="sha384-vZTG03m+2yp6N6BNi5iM4rW4oIwk5DfcNdFfxkk9ZWpDriOkXX8voJBFrAO7MpVl" crossorigin="anonymous"
    onload="renderMathInElement(document.body);"></script>
## Part 1


### General
Use geometric derivation with $$\bf{r\cdot s_0 - r\cdot s}$$ as path difference. $$\bf{r}$$ is vector from origin to arbitrary point, $$\bf{s_0}$$ is unit vector in direction of incident beam and $$\bf{s}$$ is unit vector in direction of diffracted beam.

Total amplitude is then

$$\Psi = \sum exp(-2\pi (\boldsymbol{r\cdot s_0-r\cdot s}) \bf{i}/\lambda) dV_r$$

The scattering vector is then defined as

$$(\boldsymbol{s - s_0})/\lambda $$.

We must then add a transmission function, which describes how the X-rays interact with the electron density.


$$\Psi(\boldsymbol{S}) = \sum \Psi_0(\boldsymbol{r}) exp(-2\pi (\boldsymbol{r\cdot s_0-r\cdot s}) \boldsymbol{i}/\lambda) dV_r$$

where $$\Psi_0(\boldsymbol{r}) = exp[\boldsymbol{i} \sigma\rho(\boldsymbol{r})]$$

If we consider that the total scattering is small, we arrive at the _kinematic approximation_ via Taylor series.

$$\Psi_o = 1 + \boldsymbol{i}\sigma\rho$$

The constant 1 is then neglected. This leads to the equation for the structure factor (Fourier transform of electron density).

### What is the relation between resolution and parameters of the structure?

$$N^2 = h^2 + k^2 + l^2$$

$$d = \frac{a}{\sqrt{N}}$$

$$\frac{sin\theta}{\lambda} = \frac{1}{2d}$$

### Why is phase determination important? What is the phase problem?

We must know the correct amplitudes and phases for structure factors to correctly construct the Fourier synthesis for the electron density.

Shorter $$\bf{S}$$ vectors (corresponding to smaller diffraction angle) describe the broad features. 

Reminder: $$Magnitude(\boldsymbol{S}) = \frac{2sin\theta}{\lambda}$$




### Explain how a diffraction experiment works.


### What is the expression for the diffracted amplitude? How does this arise?

### Describe the lower-symmetry groups of triclinic, monoclinic and orthorhombic


### Describe P (primitive), C (end), I(body) and F(face) structures. Derive the systematic absences for each of these.
P - no absences
C - absence if h+k odd
I - 
F


### Explain the presence of systematic absences in terms of the primitive unit cell.

### Why is there a background to the Patterson function?


### Derive the Patterson function


### How do we arrive at the formula for the structure factor in the independent atom model?


### What are the two primary types of atomic displacement? How does this affect the form factor and why?
Isotropic
Anisotropic 

### What is the scattering vector? What are the Laue equations?

### Considering the diffracted intensities, what is the effect of:
### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- an inversion centre?
### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- a mirror plane?
### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- a rotation axis?
### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- a screw axis?
(h00) absent if h = 2n+1
### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- a glide plane? 
Perp to a axis:
(0kl) absent if k = 2n+1 for b-glide
(0kl) absent if k+l = 2n+1 for n-glide

### How is the atomic scattering factor (or form factor) typically modelled?
Cromer-Mann coefficients

### What are general equivalent positions (GEPS)?
Positions specified by application of the symmetry operators of a group to a set of (x,y,z) coordinates. 

### What is the asymmetric unit?
Minimum coordinates which must be specified in order to describe the unit cell. The entire contents of the unit cell can be generated by applying the symmetry operations to the asymmetric unit. 

### What is a special equivalent position (SEP)?
Position which coincides with a point symmetry element, meaning applying the symmetry operations of the group does not produce all of the GEPs. 


### Generate equivalent positions for the space group P2_1/c


### How is the space group determined from the diffraction pattern?
1. Geometry
2. Point symmetry and absences
3. Intensities.

Due to Friedel's Law it is difficult to discriminate between P2_1 and P2_1/m, but inspection of the atoms can indicate whether there is an inversion centre. 

### What is Friedel's law?
As structure factors of inversions of h,k and l are related only by a phase change, there is always an inversion centre in an intensity-weighted reciprocal lattice, as this holds no information about the phase.


### Describe the method of isomorphous replacement. 


### Describe the key features of the anomalous scattering method.
Introduce scattering power of atom through absorption coefficient. This is achieved through lower wavelength radiation. 

$$\Psi_0 \approx 1 + i\sigma\rho(xyz) - \eta(xyz)$$

Using $$F(\bf{S}) = \Psi(\bf{S})/\bf{i}\sigma$$, the new structure factor equation becomes

$$F(hkl) = FT[\rho(xyz)] - \frac{1}{i\sigma}FT[\eta(xyz)] $$

Then adapted into following form:

$$F(hkl) = \sum (f_n + i\Delta f_n)exp\{2\pi i (hx_n + ky_n +lz_n)\} $$

As X-ray wavelength decreases, significant amount is absorbed as energy increases. Anomalous region is beyond `absorption edge'.

$$\delta F$$ is calculated analogously to isomorphous replacement method. Similarly, $$\Phi_A$$ can be calculated. The phase angle will be $$(\Phi_A + \pi/2)$$

The cosine rule can be used in a similar way to the method for isomorphous replacement to deduce the phase. To remove ambiguity, use two types of radiation. 

Modern methods use single-wavelength anomalous disperion (SAD).


### What makes anomalous scattering particularly useful?

- Able to be used in cases where groups of atoms cannot be replaced.
- Can be used to deduce the handedness of a molecule.

### What is the Flack parameter?
x in 

$$I_{calc}(hkl) = I_{model}(hkl)+ x \cdot I_{model}(\bar{h}\bar{k}\bar{l})$$


### What are the basic principles of direct methods?
Structure determination without going through Patterson function, but instead looking directly at intensities and deducing phases.

Construction of Fourier synthesis knowing that the electron density must be positive. 

We may generate a series of S(hkl) values (where S is the sign) simply by defining a set of structure factors so that our origin is known. This is done with the properties of the space group.

We may project the structure onto an axis or the body diagonal, but the resulting summation is less likely to contain negative regions due to overlap.

We may calculate the unitary structure factor from the unitary scattering factor $$n_n = \frac{f_n}{\sum f_n} $$ 

1) Normalise F(hkl) to point atoms. (Normalise the unitary structure factors)
2) Choose origin
3) Choose random starting set of phases
4) Use triplet relationships (etc.) to expand phase set
5) Generate trial electron density
6) Repeat process.


### Considerations in absolute structure determination?
Enantiomerically pure samples must crystallise in non-centrosymmetric space group (as a centrosymmetric group would provide a mirror plane to give the enantiomer elsewhere in the unit cell).

Racemic mixtures crystallise in centrosymmetric groups for efficient packing.



### Describe the amiguities of isomorphous replacement and anomalous scattering. How can these be resolved?


### What is the heavy atom method?
Approximate overall structure factor by the structure factor of the heavy atoms. Thus, the overall phase is approximated by the phase of the heavy atoms. 

### What are dual space methods?
Prelim: Produce random phase for each F(hkl)

1) Generate trial electron density
2) Multiply any negative values by -1. 
3) Calculate new F(hkl) values
4) Replace phase set from those obtained in step 3 and repeat from step 1. 


### What is refinement?

#### What is Rietveld refinement?



### How is neutron diffraction different to XRD?
Scattering power not roughly proportional to atomic number. 

Neutron diffraction can be used to probe magnetic properties as neutrons have spin.



