---
layout: post
title:  Electronic structure
categories: theoretical
---
<script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
<script id="MathJax-script" async src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js"></script>




Let's remind ourselves of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation. The core of the approximation is the fact that the total wavefunction is factorisable as an electronic part and a nuclear part. 


Now, the electronic hamiltonian includes a dependence on the nuclear position. Hence, we set the position of the nuclei as fixed and calculate the total electronic energy. This is the 'clamped-nucleus' energy. This energy can then be used within the nuclear hamiltonian, which yields a total energy. 





---
<sub>Note: We obscure the unitary matrix at times in the mathematics of this course and other similar courses. To treat the unitary matrix with a proper definition,</sub>
$$UU^\dagger = I$$
$$U = exp(iH)$$
<sub>where H is a Hermitian matrix and $\dagger$ denotes the Hermitian adjoint. $det(U) = exp(i\phi)$,  which is 1 or -1 when orbitals are real. However, we are generally concerned with the square of this.</sub>


---
## Where does the start of the Hartree-Fock self-consistent field method come from?

We begin by forming the many-electron wavefunction as the product of one-electron wavefunctions which would be formed by the action of all of the one-electron Hamiltonians.






## Remind ourselves - what are the atomic units?

Length - Bohr ($$a_0$$)\
Charge - electron ($$e$$)\
Unit of action $$\hbar$$ - (implies $$4\pi\epsilon_0$$)\
Mass - electron ($$m_e$$)

Unit of energy is Hartree, $$E_h$$
$$E_h = \frac{\hbar^2}{m_ea_0^2}$$

## What is correlation energy?

Energy corresponding to local distortions of an electron distribution. HF methods do not take this into account, looking only at an averaged potential, meaning the dissocation energy is always higher than the true value.

To include correlation, we could introduce a linear term of interelectronic distances into the wavefunction, but this makes the number of coordinates unwieldy. Instead, we use the idea of determinants.

## What is the definition of the anti-symmetriser?

$$\hat{A} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{n!}}\sum \sigma_u\hat{P}_u$$


where $$\hat{\sigma}_u$$ odd (-1) or even (+1) depending on nature of $$\hat{P}_u$$.

## Difference between Slater-type orbitals and Gaussians?
Derivative of Gaussian is zero at origin. Slater orbitals have exp(-Zr) dependence, Gaussian have exp(-ar$$^2$$)

## Write out the Gaussian product theorem.

## Outline the conventional basis sets in computational chemistry.

## Explain the rules behind the number of functions in some of the basis sets.

## What is the difference between dynamical and non-dynamical correlation?

## Key result of antisymmetriser?
Applying it to both Hartree products is equivalent to applying it only to product in ket.

## What is result of expectation value of energy? How do we arrive at this?
Key is to use anti-symmetriser property.

Final result is 

$$E = \sum h_{ii} + \sum_{i<j} (ii\vert jj) - (ij\vert ij) \\
E = \sum h_{ii} + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i<j} (ii\vert jj) - (ij\vert ij)$$

For n orbital, 2n electron system,



<sub>In C8 notes, summation between electrons and orbitals should be made more clear. </sub>

## Explain Moller-Plesset theory.

## Explain coupled-cluster theory. 

## Road to Roothaan (closed shell)

*insert section on how to get to Fock eigenvalue equation (MQM Lagrange explanation)*

E must be stationary with respect to variation $$\phi_k \rightarrow \phi_k + \epsilon\phi_a$$ where $$\phi_a$$ are the virtual orbitals. 

This expression is substituted into the expression for the closed shell energy andd the coefficient of $$\epsilon$$ is set to zero. The resulting stationary condition is a Fock matrix element.

Solving $$f(\mathbf{r_1})\psi_i(\mathbf{r_1}) = \epsilon_i \psi_i(\mathbf{r_1})$$. So, we want to solve this. Well, it would work fine for atoms if we solved numerically, but not for molecules (why?). Therefore, we expand the molecular orbitals in terms of atomic orbital basis functions.

$$\psi_i = \sum_{\mu=1}^{N_{BF}}C_{\mu i} \phi_i$$

where C corresponds to the coefficients of the basis functions and $\phi_i$ correspond to the basis functions themselves.

Now, let us substitute this into the equation including the Fock operator (and change the index to $\nu$ [why?]), then pre-multiply by $\phi^*_\mu$ and integrate over the electron coordinate $\mathbf{r_1}$.

$$\sum_{\nu}C_{\nu i} \int \phi^*_{\mu}(\mathbf{r_1}) f(\mathbf{r_1}) \phi_\nu(\mathbf{r_1}) \,d\mathbf{r_1}= \epsilon_i \sum_{\nu} C_{\nu i} \int \phi^*_{\mu}(\mathbf{r_1}) \phi_\nu(\mathbf{r_1}) \,d\mathbf{r_1}$$

The left-hand side is written in terms of the **Fock matrix** and the write-hand side in terms of the **overlap matrix**.

---
<sub>Note: It is important to distinguish between</sub> 
$$f_1 = h_1 + \sum_{i=1}^{N_{so}}[J_i(1) - K_i(1)]$$ 
<sub>and</sub>

$$f_1  =h_1 +\sum_{i=1}[2J_i(1) - K_1(1)]$$ 
<sub>The former expression sums over all spin orbitals, whereas the latter expression is for a closed shell where all orbitals are doubly occupied. </sub>

<sub>MQM pg. 253 has a good derivation of the Lagrange multiplier approach. Jensen also has a clear explanation, which shows that the MOs are Lagrange multipliers.   </sub>

<sub>The expression for the total energy is</sub> $$E=2\sum_s\epsilon_s - \sum_{r,s}[2J_{r,s} - K_{r,s}]$$
<sub>The sum is over the occupied orbitals, which are all filled for a closed shell atom. Hence, the factor of two corresponds to the two electrons in each orbital, with one set of double-counting interactions removed to eliminate the effect of double counting. </sub>


---


$$ \sum_{\nu} F_{\mu \nu} C_{\nu i} = \epsilon_i \sum_{\nu } S_{\mu \nu} C_{\nu i} $$


## What is the Hartree-Fock method?

Approximate wavefunction as single Slater determinant of antisymmetrised product of orbitals, with each orbital describing one electron. 

The Hartree-Fock method does not give an exact solution to the Schroedinger equation. In an infinite basis set, it gives the best single-determinant wavefunction.


## Why does restricted Hartree-Fock give a higher energy than unrestricted?

Unrestricted Hartree-Fock allows for different spatial orbitals for electrons with $\alpha$ and $\beta$ spin.

RHF calculations give equilibrium bond lengths which are too short, as the increase in energy as a function of bond length is too steep. Other properties such as dipole moment will be incorrect, as the wavefunction contains too much ionic character.

In dative bonds however, the equilibrium bond length is too long!

Why should they have different spatial orbitals? Well, they will interact differently with the other $\alpha$ electrons compared to the other $\beta$ eletrons due to the exchange operator. 


## What is size consistency and why is it important?




## What is Moller-Plesset?

Perturbational (non-variational) method that is size-consistent. Includes electron correlation.

For the second-order energy correction, the energy is
$$\langle \Phi^0 |H^1|\Phi^1\rangle$$
however, as $H^1 = H-H^0$ and $H^0$ is the Fock operator, $H^1 = H$ as the Fock operators produced eigenvalues and the remaining braket expression features orthogonal wavefunctions $\langle \Phi^0|\Phi^1\rangle$, which equates to zero. 

Cannot be applied when the HOMO-LUMO gap is zero, as the denominator of E$^{(2)}$ goes to zero and the solution diverges to $-\infty$. 

O(M$^5$) method (as M$^5$ corresponds to transformation of AO integrals to MO)

## What is coupled cluster theory?

Uses definition of excitation operator, whereby all corrections (single, double, triple, etc. up to a given type) are present to infinite order. The couple cluster wave function is written in terms of an exponential. Clusters may be connected (e.g. T$_1$) or disconnected (e.g. T$_1^2$).

Instead of using a variational principle, the coupled cluster Schroedinger equation is projected onto the reference wavefunction. 

Size consistent method due to exponential form of wave function.



CCSD(T) scales as M$^7$? Gold standard.

## What is the multiconfiguration self-consistent field method?

As well as optimising the coefficients in front of the determinants, the MOs used for constructing the determinants is optimised by the variational principle.


## What is configuration interaction?

The configuration interaction takes into account the effect of electron correlation by introducing additional determinants of the same symmetry as the state of interest. In the example of H$_2$, the mixture of states and a subsequent variational calculation reduces the probability that both electrons are present on the same atom.

However, the product of two He atoms with a double replacement will include a term with a quadruple replacement, which would not be covered by CI with doubles.


## What are static and dynamic correlation?

Dynamic - related to repulsion when two electrons come together.

Non-dynamic - long-range, relating to describing dissociation correctly.

---
<sub>Note: There are two types of electron correlation: radial (or in-out) and angular.  </sub>

---


## What is valence bond method?

MOs are delocalised as the Lagrange multiplier matrix is canonically set to be diagonal. MOs may be localised by subsequent mixing. 

If we consider a single-determinant HF wavefunction for H2, the wavefunction features an equal amount of ionic and covalent parts. To reconcile this with the behaviour that at large distances the covalent part must dominate, we introduce a second determinant with the corresponding antibonding orbital.

Then, the many-electron wavefunction $\Psi$ is:

$$ \Psi_{CI} = a_0 \Phi_0 + a_1 \Phi_1 $$

where the coefficients are determined by the variational principle.

The simplest VB description (Heitler-London) features two electrons coupled into an antisymmetrised singlet pair, representing the covalent contribution. A further determinant can be added to represent the ionic contribution.

A further valence bond description is the Coulson-Fischer type, where the atomic orbitals are allowed to distort slightly from their shape.

$$ \phi_A = \chi_A + c\chi_B$$

This wavefunction does not require an excited determinant, as the orbitals change to their pure atomic states at large distances. 

# Density Functional Theory

## What is the nuclear cusp condition equation?

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial r_A} \rho(r_A)|_{r_A = 0} = -2Z\rho(0)$$
(Using spherical average of \rho)

## Functional derivative
$$F[\rho] = \int f(\rho, \nabla \rho) dr$$

$$\frac{\delta F}{\delta \rho(r)} = \frac{\partial f}{\partial \rho} - \nabla\cdot\frac{\partial f}{\partial \nabla\rho}$$

Where $$\rho$$ is a function of $$\mathbf{r}$$


## H-K 1
Electron density determines external potential (external potential is unique to ground-state electronic density)
Proof: by contradiction. Assume that there are two external potentials which give rise to the same density. Form the inequalities from the variational principle for a ground state energy $$E_0$$ and $$E_0'$$, with opposite wavefunctions ($$\Psi'$$ and $$\Psi$$). Adding the two inequalities together leads to a contradiction. 

---
<sub>Requires definition of energy as functional in terms of integral over product of density and external potential. The remainder of the Hamiltonian is a universal operator (meaning independent of the external potential).</sub>
---

## H-K 2
Functional that gives ground state energy must give the lowest energy only for the ground state density.

## What is the Bright-Wilson proof?
AJWT

## Explain the Levy constrained search
Define a functional of the aforementioned universal operator. 

$$ F[n] = min_{|\Psi\rangle\rightarrow n} \langle \Psi |\hat{F}|\Psi\rangle  $$
i.e. minimum value of expectation value with respect to all states which give the density _n_. 

This can then be minimised over the space of all possible densities to give the exact ground-state many-body energy for every external potential.

$$ E_\nu[\rho] = min_{\rho} \Bigg\{ F[n] + \int\nu(\bf{r})\rho(\bf{r}) d\bf{r}  \Bigg\} $$
(analogous to finding the shortest person in each room of a house, then searching through to find the shortest?)

From the variational principle, we know that the expression for $$E_v[\rho] \geq E_0$$ (as the functional can be written in expectation value notation). 

But from the minimisation definition given above, $$ F[\rho_0] \leq \langle \Psi_0 | \hat{F}| \Psi_0 \rangle$$ (why? Explain)

Adding $$ \int \rho_0(\bf{r})\nu(\bf{r})d\bf{r}$$ to both sides gives

$$ E_\nu[\rho_0] \leq E_0$$

which leads to

$$ E_\nu[\rho] \geq E_\nu[\rho_0] = E_0$$

This leads us to consider: what is the purpose of this formulation? It shows that searches can consider N-representable densities, rather than the more troublesome $$\nu$$-representable densities. Moreover, the restriction to limit to non-degenerate ground states is lifted.

---

<sub>What does $$\nu$$-representable mean? It means that $$\rho(\bf{r})$$ corresponds to an antisymmetric wavefunction of the ground-state of the Hamiltonian.</sub>

---


## What is Kohn-Sham theory?
Take system to consist of non-interacting entities with the same density as the fully-interacting system. For the non-interacting system, the kinetic energy is known.

## Explain significance of one and two particle density matrices.
AJWT

## What is the form of the Hartree-Fock exchange energy in terms of the electron density?|

$$K = \int \int\sum_{i j} \frac{\phi_i^*(1)\phi_i^*(2)\phi_j^*(2)\phi_j(1)}{|(1)-(2)|} dr_1dr_2 $$

$$ = -\frac{1}{4}\int \int \frac{|\rho(r_1,r_2)|^2}{|r_1-r_2|}dr_1dr_2$$

## Scaling relations


## Define a universal functional. 
Independent of the external field. 


$$F[\rho] = \hat{T} + \hat{V}_{ee}$$

## What is the adiabatic connection?


## Prove the Hellmann-Feynmann theorem.


## Explain the asymptotic behaviour of the density
$$\rho \approx exp[-2(2I_{min})^{1/2}r]$$


## What are the important results of LDA?


## What are the primary challenges for DFT?
K-S equations rely on a single Slater determinant to produce the K-S orbitals. If there are other determinants similar in energy, DFT struggles (can struggle with H$$_2$$ dissociation). 
(Described in terms of self-interaction. It is fixed if the functional has 100% exact HF exchange, but most functionals do not).

Energies are too low in charge transfer reactions for the same reason described above.

Dipsersion interaction must be appended.

Jacob's ladder:

Exact exchange + exact partial correlation
Hybrid-meta GGA
Hybrid GGA
Meta GGA
GGA
LDA

# Outline quantum Monte-Carlo methods. 


## Explain the limitations of QMC methods



## Stochastic CC theory
