---
layout: default
title:  "Theoretical techniques"
categories: theoretical
---
<script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
<script id="MathJax-script" async src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js"></script>
## What is the central field approximation?
Interaction of all other electrons when considering one electron is averaged to a spherically symmetric central field. 

For a molecule, the approach must be extended to a general form of potential, as molecules are not spherically symmetric.

## Give the Hückel formulae for the orbital coefficients and energies for linear and cyclic polyenes.

### Linear

$$c^{(n)}_s = \sqrt{\frac{2}{N+1}}sin(\frac{\pi n s }{N+1})$$
s denotes atom, n denotes molecular orbital. 

$$\epsilon_n = \alpha + 2\beta cos(\frac{\pi n}{N+1})$$

### Cyclic

$$\epsilon_n = \alpha + 2\beta cos\left(\frac{2\pi n}{N}\right) $$

$$\frac{N}{2} < n \leq \frac{N}{2}$$

$$c^{(n)}_s=exp(\frac{i 2\pi n s}{N})$$

But from this we may form in- and out- of phase combinations so that the molecular orbitals are real-valued.

$$c_s^{(N/2)}=\sqrt{\frac{1}{N}}$$\
$$c_s^{(ns)} = \sqrt{\frac{2}{N}}sin(\frac{2\pi n s}{N})$$\
$$c_s^{(nc)} = \sqrt{\frac{2}{N}}cos(\frac{2\pi n s}{N})$$\
$$c_s^{(0)} = \sqrt{\frac{1}{N}}(-1)^s$$

Hückel integral, $\alpha_s$ is effectively the orbital energy, as the integral involving the potential of electrons not at atom s is approximately zero, as it matches the positive charge of the nuclei. 

'Kinetic' part of $\beta$ integral is larger than potential. 


## Why can the Hückel hamiltonian be used as an effective hamiltonian?
Potential of nuclei cancel with potential of electrons for a nuclear species. 

For the resonance integral, the electron potential is considered to be local and therefore a value. 


## Explain the significance of single electron experiments in Hückel theory.

Single electron experiments (e.g. ionisation energy) yield values of $\beta$ which are often more than twice as large as the total energy experiments, as single-electron energy experiments double-count the repulsion between electrons.

## What is the population operator?

$$\hat{q}_s = |\phi_s \rangle\langle \phi_s |$$ \
Then sum over orbitals if necessary. $f_n$ is occupation (0,1,2).

## What is the bond-order operator?

$$\hat{p}_{st} = \frac{1}{2}(|\phi_s\rangle\langle \phi_t | + |\phi_t\rangle\langle \phi_s|)$$
Positive is bonding contribution


## List the rules for alternant hydrocarbons

1. Energy levels are symmetric about energy reference/zero.
2. AO coefficients of complementary orbitals are obtained by reversing the sign of unstarred atom 
3. In a neutral alternant, the atomic populations in the ground state are unity.
4. Coefficients around a point sum to zero for the non-bonding orbital of odd alternants.

Symmetric energy levels about energy reference/zero.



## Perbation theory

$$H = H_{ref} + U$$

$$\Delta^{(1)}\epsilon_i  = \langle \psi_i |U|\psi_i\rangle$$
(1) representing first order

If orbitals degenerate, then must form matrix in basis of these orbitals and solve for eigenvalues. Eigenvectors give the linear combination which has the perturbed energy 

# Most of remainder of first half of course is covered (in greater detail and with clearer notation) in C8 Electronic Structure


## Explain why Hartree-Fock overpredicts bond-dissociation energy for H$_2$

Expanding the ground state wavefunction, there are still ionic ($\phi_a(1)\phi_a(2)$ and $\phi_b(1)\phi_b(2)$) terms present. Hence, we require electron correlation, which would not predict that there is a 50% chance of both electrons being on one atom. 



## Explain molecular force fields and describe their utility.



## What are normal modes?

Linear combination of displacements (that is, the internal motions specified by independent coordinates) which are dynamically independent for a quadratic potential. 

## Briefly describe density functional theory.

Approach which uses electron density rather than wavefunction approach. 

Fock operator's K term replaced by XC term in Kohn-Sham operator, knows as the exchange-correlation potential. The exact form of the exchange-correlation functional is unknown, but the Kohn-Sham equations can be solved via an iterative SCF procedure. 

DFT good at equilibrium geometries. 

## Briefly discuss quantum dynamics.

Once electronic potential energy surface is obtained and rovibrational states are obtained by solving nuclear Schrödinger quation, spectroscopic data can be obtained. Becomes difficult for systems larger than a few atoms. 


Sampling over quantum partition function is notoriously difficult. 

## Explain the general approach of molecular dynamics.

1. Calculate potential energy surface.
2. Calcalate gradient to obtain force.

Useful when sampling the thermally accessible configurations of a system. Nuclei are treated classically (meaning there are no quantum effects included and thus the results should be treated with care). Calculations can use Density Functional Approximations. 

## How do we account for intermolecular forces in calculations?

Parameterisation. Break down total energy into its constituent parts. Electrostatic, inductive and dispersive are all Coulombic in nature. Short-range interactions are quantum-mechanical.

Electrostatic varies on type of charge involved.
Inductive depends on polarisability tensor.
Dispersion goes as r$^{-6}$.

## Explain the force field approach 

Produces energy as parameterised function of nuclear coordinates (e.g. Morse potential)

Generally created close to eqm geometry, so should be expected to be good energies only here.

Absolute values of energy do not have particular meaning.

Force fields are not appropriate to investigate situations where bonds are being broken. 



### When does the Born-Oppenheimer approximation break down?

If we consider a molecule such as Li-F, at the equilibrium distance it is described by an ionic wavefunction, representing Li$^+$F$^-$. However, at great distances, it will be described by a covalent interaction, as the bond breaks homolytically in the gas phase. In the adiabatic approximation, there is an 'avoided crossing' at the point at which the wavefunction becomes more covalent than ionic in nature, meaning the symmetry of the wavefunctions leads to a separation in their energies and they do not cross. Hence, at this distance, the Born-Oppenheimer approximation is not particularly accurate.






