---
layout: post
title:  "Structure and reactivity"
categories: physical
---

<!---  https://katex.org/docs/autorender.html -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.css" integrity="sha384-Um5gpz1odJg5Z4HAmzPtgZKdTBHZdw8S29IecapCSB31ligYPhHQZMIlWLYQGVoc" crossorigin="anonymous">
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.js" integrity="sha384-YNHdsYkH6gMx9y3mRkmcJ2mFUjTd0qNQQvY9VYZgQd7DcN7env35GzlmFaZ23JGp" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/contrib/auto-render.min.js" integrity="sha384-vZTG03m+2yp6N6BNi5iM4rW4oIwk5DfcNdFfxkk9ZWpDriOkXX8voJBFrAO7MpVl" crossorigin="anonymous"
    onload="renderMathInElement(document.body);"></script>

## Fleming

## Describe the process of FT-NMR
$\pi/2$ pulse followed by acquisition of signal. Signal precesses at Larmor frequency, determined by nucleus. Field inhomogeneities cause signals to spread. 

## Typical geminal coupling?
-12 Hz. Raised by adjacent EWG.

## Effect of antiperiplanar group to an atom on its coupling?
Lowers coupling. E.g. ex-aq lowered from ~5.5 to ~2.5.

## Effect on electropositive atom (e.g. Li)?
Raises coupling constant. 

## How is a FT-IR signal tweaked?
Zero-filling - adds in more points\
Apodisation - 1. exponential used improve signal-to-noise
2. Gaussian used to change nature of peak and change from Lorentzian to Gaussian

## What is the definition of chemical shift?

$$\frac{\nu_s - \nu_{ref}}{operating frequency}$$

## What effect does adjacent electronegative/positive atoms have on chemical shift?
Electronegative atoms reduce electron density, thus deshielding a nucleus and leading to a shift further downfield. 


## Describe the angular dependence of the substituent effect.
Antiperiplanar arrangement most significant in affecting shifts. 

## What are diastereotopic groups and atoms?
If one of atoms or groups replaced, diastereomers formed. They only come into resonance at the same frequency when the applied field coincidentally averages to the same value. 

## With an example, demonstrate the effect of having an OH group axial or equatorial in a ring.
(axial will reduce coupling constant more than equatorial. )

## Roofing formula
$$\nu_a - \nu_b = \sqrt{(\nu_4-\nu_1)(\nu_3-\nu_2)}$$

## How can one reduce the effects of a second-order spectrum?
Use a higher field spectrometer. This will increase the difference between two shifts and thus increase the ratio to the coupling constants. 

## Formula for Gibbs energy relating to exchange?
$$\Delta G = RT_c[23 + ln\frac{T_c}{\Delta \nu}]$$

## Describe the uses of chemical shift reagents
Allows the signals of enantiomers to be split.
Broadening goes as square of field strength, so not as useful on modern instruments.

## Describe enantiomeric excess and diastereomeric ratio. 
Excess is %major - %minor

# What is the formula for specific optical rotation

$$\alpha = \frac{[\alpha c l ]}{100}$$
Rotations can indicate enantiomeric excess, as enantiomers will have different rotations.

## How do we measure $^{1}J_{C-H}$?
CLIP-HSQC spectrum

## What kind of molecules does NOE work for? Why?
Molecules MW <500. Relates to rate of tumbling being in resonance with certain quantum transitions.

## What are relayed NOEs?
NOE signal (often negative) caused by a group in proximity to a group that is in proximity to the irradiated signal. 

## What is TOCSY?
Technique to separate spin systems when a signal in one of the systems is irradiated. Systems separated by quaternary centre, oxygen atom, or carbonyl group, for example. 

If a signal is far away, it will only be brought up later in time, meaning overlapping multiplets may show one multiplet first. 


## Nolan

## Describe hard and soft nucleophiles

Soft nucleophile = strong acid 

## What is the $\alpha$-effect?

## What is an ambident nucleophile? Give an example. 
Nucleophile with capability for both soft and hard attack.
## How can S$_N$1 be promoted for the nitrite anion?

 Hard, S$_N$1-type reaction promoted by addition of Ag(I) salts.

## How is the hard reaction of an enolate promoted?
Addition of crown ether to complex sodium ion.

## Describe how to utilise the ambident nature of a phenolate. 
C: use a tightly bound ion pair.\ 
Use protic solvent to create shell around oxygen.

O: use aprotic solvent (toluene, ether DMF)
Choose R group (attached to O) to promote hard reaction.

## Describe hyperconjugation and its negative analogue.
Donation of electrons from $\sigma$$ bond or N/O l.p. into carbocation.
- Negative: donation of electrons from anion into C-X $\sigma^*$ orbital.  

## Describe the effect of
- Adjacent benzyl/phenyl
- Adjacent heteroatom
- Adjacent carbonyl

## Describe the ring-forming favourability from 3- to 7-membered rings. 


## Describe Baldwin's rules. When do they not apply?
Empirical observations of ring-closing favourability. Do not apply for pericyclic or second-row elements.

Exo is favourable for tet and trig, but only for 5-7 membered rings of dig. All endo favourable for dig. 

Relates to orbital overlap and angle of approach. 

## How do Baldwin's rules extend to enolates?

(enolendo) favoured only for 6-membered rings and above.
(enolexo) favoured for all rings sizes. 

## What is the Thorpe-Ingold effect? Explain the two-fold explanation.
The way in which substituents affect the rate or eqm constant of ring-forming reactions. 

1. Decreased bond angles from additional substituents bring reaction centres closer together (small rings). 
2. Entropy. More substituents mean fewer conformations and so entropy change is less negative.

## Illustrate the `benzyne' mechanism. What result is indicative of this route?


## Provide examples of fragmentation.
1,3-diol\
retro-aldol\
alkaline cleavage of $\beta$-diketones
## Draw the mechanism for migration of a Grignard reagent.

## What are the conditions required for a Beckmann rearrangement?
(Carbonyl+) hydroxylamine & H$^+$. Then H$^+$, H$_2$O. 

## Draw the mechanism for a Beckmann rearragement.

## What is the Ritter reaction?
Beckmann when the migrating group forms a stable carbocation, so leaves first. 

## What are the conditions required for a Hofmann rearrangement? 
Br$_2$, KOH. 

## Draw the mechanism for a Hofmann rearrangement.

## What are the conditions required for a Curtius rearrangement?
N$_2$, KOH.

## What are the conditions required for a Schmidt rearrangement?
N$_3$H. H$_2$O. 

## What are the conditions required for a Arndt-Eistert rearrangement (homologation of acyl chloride to acid)?
Diazomethane, water.

## Draw the mechanism for methyl ester formation via diazomethane. 

## Draw the mechanism for Baeyer-Villiger oxidation.



## How are carbenes stabilised?
Donation of lone pairs from adjacent orbitals into empty p-orbitals. 

## What are the reactive differences between singlet and triplet carbenes?
_Triplet_
sp$$_2$$ hybridised
Larger angle between ligands (130-150)
Electrons unpaired
CH$$_2$$, CHPh, CHR, CPh$$_2$$


_Singlet_
Smaller angle (100-110)
Paired electrons
CCl$$_2$$, CHCl, C(OMe)$$_2$$

Triplets generally more stable
    Singlet state carbenes have neighbouring electron-rich substituents, which lowers energy (can be shown on MO diagram)n


## What are the 6 primary methods of generating carbenes?
1) Diazomethane (diazocarbonyl decomp.)
Rhodium method

2) Thermal deocomposition of diazo (Bamford-Stevens)

3) Alpha elimination from chloroform

4) Ketene decomposition (but not widely used)

5) Small ring decomposition

6) Heterocycle fragmentation (h$$\nu$$ or $$\Delta$$)

## Draw an MO diagram for the formation of cyclopropane from singlet carbene.
_Concerted_ and _stereospecifically_ syn


## Why are reactions of triplet carbenes with double bonds different to singlet?
Triplet carbenes require a spin flip before a bond can form as the initial addition is a radical process. Rotation of groups may occur before the spin flip occurs, as it is relatively slow compared to rotations.

## What is the Simmons-Smith reaction?
Formation of stereospecifically syn cyclopropane

Requires CH$$_2$$I$$_2$$ and Et$$_2$$Zn (used to be Cu/Zn)

First Zn inserts between I and C in CH$$_2$$$$I_2$$. Then when carbene reacts with double bond, other iodine atom forms bond with the Zn.

Cyclopropanation will take place on the same side as the ring as an alcohol due to the stabilisation when Zn and OH coordinate.

## Describe further carbene reactions.
May insert into C-C bonds if no C=C present. Very rare with triplet though.

Singlet LUMO: p-orbital
CH HOMO: $$\sigma$$

Singlet HOMO: sp$$^2$$
CH LUMO: $$\sigma^*$$


## What are the four types of pericyclic reaction?
- Cycloaddition
- Electrocyclic
- Sigmatropic
- Group transfer

