---
layout: post
title:  "Statistical mechanics"
categories: physical
---

<!---  https://katex.org/docs/autorender.html -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.css" integrity="sha384-Um5gpz1odJg5Z4HAmzPtgZKdTBHZdw8S29IecapCSB31ligYPhHQZMIlWLYQGVoc" crossorigin="anonymous">
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/katex.min.js" integrity="sha384-YNHdsYkH6gMx9y3mRkmcJ2mFUjTd0qNQQvY9VYZgQd7DcN7env35GzlmFaZ23JGp" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.13.11/dist/contrib/auto-render.min.js" integrity="sha384-vZTG03m+2yp6N6BNi5iM4rW4oIwk5DfcNdFfxkk9ZWpDriOkXX8voJBFrAO7MpVl" crossorigin="anonymous"
    onload="renderMathInElement(document.body);"></script>



|Microcanonical ensemble<br>Constant $$N,V,E$$|Canonical ensemble <br>Constant $$N,V,T$$|
|--|--|
|$$S = k_b ln \Omega$$                                               |$$A = E - TS = -k_B T ln Q$$|
|$$dE = -PdV + TdS + \mu dN$$                                        |$$dA = -PdV - SdT + \mu dN$$|
|$$\frac{1}{T} = \left(\frac{\partial S }{\partial E} \right)_{N,V}$$|$$E = \left( \frac{\partial (\beta A)}{\partial \beta} \right)_{N,V}$$|
|$$P = T \left(\frac{\partial S}{\partial V} \right)_{E,N}$$         |$$P = - \left(\frac{\partial A}{\partial V}\right)_{N,T}$$|
|$$\mu = -T \left( \frac{\partial S}{\partial N}\right)_{E,V}$$|$$\mu = \left( \frac{\partial A}{\partial N}\right)_{V,T}$$|


|Isothermal-isobaric ensemble<br>Constant $$N,P,T$$|Grand ensemble <br>Constant $$\mu,V,T$$|
|--|--|
|$$G = A + PV = N\mu = -k_bTln\Delta$$|$$\phi  = A - \mu N = -PV = -k_BTln \Xi$$|
|$$dG = VdP - SdT + \mu dN$$|$$d\phi = -PdV - SdT - Nd\mu$$|
|$$H = E + PV = \left(\frac{\partial(\beta G)}{\partial \beta} \right)_{N,P}$$|$$N = -\left(\frac{\partial\phi}{\partial\mu}\right)_{V,T}$$|
|$$V = \left(\frac{\partial G}{\partial P}\right)_{N,T}$$|$$P = - \left(\frac{\partial\phi}{\partial V}\right)_{T,\mu}$$|
|$$\mu = \left(\frac{\partial G}{\partial N}\right)_{P,T}$$|$$E = N\mu + \left(\frac{\partial(\beta\phi)}{\partial\beta}\right)_{\mu, V}$$|

## What is the principle of a priori probabilities?
Systeme equally likely to be found in any of its states. 

## What is the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation?

$$\left(\frac{\partial (G/T)}{\partial T}\right)_P = -\frac{H}{T^2}$$


## Fluctuations
Expand S in Taylor series about E$$^*$$ (most likely energy)

OR

differentiate average w.r.t $$\beta$$ using partition function.

## How do we conclude that Helmholtz energy is minimum at eqm?
Consider total states consisting of system and bath (which is a product of $$\Omega$$).

Condition for eqm is that derivative of ln $$\Omega$$ w.r.t. $$E_s$$ vanishes. Following this, we can identify entropy in the equation and see that $$\beta(E_{sys} - TS_{sys})$$ must be minimised.
8
## Why can we not compute thermal averages in practice?
Cannot solve many-body Hamiltonian. 
Numerical evaluation would not be reasonable, given the number of states.

## Derive the expression for the pressure of interacting particles and with pairwise additive forces.


## What is the law of corresponding states?


## Show that temperatures, pressures and chemical potentials must be equal at eqm.
dS$$_1$$ +dS$$_2$$ = 0 


## Provide the thermodynamic arguments to find the stability of a single phase. 
Consider variation of entropy to 2nd order.

$$\Delta S = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\partial(1/T)}{\partial E}(\Delta E)^2\right)_1 + \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\partial(1/T)}{\partial E}(\Delta E)^2\right)_2$$

S is maximum, so $$\Delta S$$ must be less than or equal to zero. 

Can do a similar trick with Helmholtz energy

$$\Delta A = \frac{\partial^2A}{\partial V^2} (\Delta V)^2\\\\
 =- \frac{\partial P}{\partial V} (\Delta V)^2\\
= \frac{1}{\kappa V} (\Delta V)^2
$$
A is minimised, so $$\kappa \geq 0$$.


## Describe the conditions for coexistence. 
Plotting Helmholtz energy against volume, there must be a common tangent between two points (which implies pressures equal. It then follows that chemical potentials are equal also).

Positions are unstable if $$\frac{\partial^2 A}{\partial V^2} \leq 0$$. That is, the lineshape is concave.  


## What is the spinodal?
The boundary between the stable and metastable regions for phases. Considering $$P_r$$ vs $$V_r$$ graphs, the spinodals are the turning points.


## Why do we require pertubation theory?
To arrive at estimates for quantities which are not mechanical averages, such as the free energy. Relies on knowing a reference system.

### What is the Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality? Why is it important ? Derive it.
Compute deriative of free energy with respect to $$\lambda$$.

$$\left(\frac{\partial A}{\partial\lambda}_{N,V,T} = \left\langle\frac{\partial U}{\partial \lambda}_{\lambda} \right\rangle \right)$$

Second derivative is always non-positive, which suggests that the derivative at $$\lambda$$ = 0 is greater than subsequent values. 

Hence, the perturbation theory estimate is always an upper bound.

Best results when fluctuations of $$U_1-U_0$$ are small. 

## Mean field theory and Ising model


## Describe the significance van der Waals equation.
Fluctuation of Gibbs-Bogoliubov can be made to disappear by taking form of potential as repulsive core and mild attraction over significant distance beyond this.

## By how much does the addition of a hard sphere reduce the volume available?
$$\frac{4\pi\sigma^3}{3}$$, where $$\sigma$$ is the diameter. This is because the centres of masses of two spheres must be separated by their diameters.


## What is the hard-sphere partition function?
Product of $$\frac{1}{V^{3N}N!}$$ and accessible volumes for N particles (i.e. $$V(V-\nu_{ex})(V-2\nu_{ex})$$ etc.

Approximate as product of exponentials.

We can then deduce the pressure from $$\frac{-\partial V}{\partial V}_{N,T}$$

All of this is valid only at low densities. 

## How do mean field attractions relate to van der Waals? How does the Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality become an identity?

Consider a sphere of radius $$R_c$$ having $$N_c$$ particles. Each particle contributes $$\epsilon/2$$ (half due to double counting) When $$R_c -> \infty$$, so does the number of neighbours, meaning the fluctuation diminishes. 

$$(A/N)_{vdW} = (A/N)_{HS} - \rho (2\pi/3)R_c^3 \epsilon$$

Hard sphere is the reference system. If we sub in the pressure from manipulation of the HS partition function (using the bridge relation and $$\frac{\partial A}{\partial V} = -P$$), then we arrive at the van der Waals equation. 

## What is a binodal?
Point of coexistence.

## What is the Maxwell equal area construction?
Consider previous thoughts on graphs of Helmholtz energy against volume. For co-existences, there must have been a common tangent, signifying a common pressure. If these pressures are common,
$$N\mu_1 = A_1 + PV_1$$
$$N\mu_2 = A_2 + PV_2$$
Hence, as chemical potentials are equal,
$$A_1 - A_2 = P(V_2 - V_1)$$
Consider the rectangular area on the right hand side of the equation. The left-hand side may be expressed in terms of thermodynamic integration, $$PdV$$. Comparing the area under this graph, it has an additional area where we approach the spinodal at the maximum, as well as less area when we approach the spinodal at the minimum of the curve. From this, these two areas must be equal so that they cancel. P is varied until this occurs.


## What is the virial expansion?
Power series of compressibility factor, Z

$$Z = \frac{PV}{Nk_BT}$$

## What is the Mayer f-function?


## What is the Boyle temperature?


## What is the Widom particle insertion method?
Chemical potential computed by $$\left(\langle) \frac{\partial A}{\partial N} \right)_{V, T}$$. For $$\Delta N -> 1$$, we may approximate this as the change in Helmholtz energy. 

If we insert a particle and it overlaps, then $$\Delta U$$ will be $$\infty$$



### What is the Green-Kubo relation? Why is it important? Derive it. 


### What is the random walk? Why is it important? Derive it. 



### What is the velocity auto-correlation function? Why is it important? Derive it.

The velocity auto-correlation function is an equilibrium property of the system. It describes velocities at different times along the eqm trajectory.\
    -> Equilibrium properties are time invariant, meaning the time-correlation function can be shifted by an arbitrary amount $$\tau$$.