# Electrochemistry

## Why is electrochemistry important in analytical studies?

- Analyse a solution for the presence of metal ions.
- Investigate the redox behaviour of different species.
- Electrosynthesis.
- Generation of radicals or unstable ions for further analytic or spectroscopic investigation.


## What is the open-circuit potential (OCV)?

The OCV is the measured potential across two electrodes when no current flows. An OCV cannot be defined when a redox couole cannot be defined.



If an electrode is made to be more negative, the energy level of the electrons increases. An electron is then likely to be lost to an MO of the electrolyte, meaning oxidation of the electrode takes place.

Bard and Faulkner. If the direction of electron flow is from the electrode to protons in solution, this is a _cathodic_ current flow.

## What is an ideal polarised electrode?

An electrode at which only non-Faradaic processes take place. That is, there are no current-inducing charge-transfer reactions by the bulk solution. No real electrode can behave like this over an entire potential range, but some electrodes demonstrate this behaviour over large potential ranges. 

## Describe the arrangement of the solution close to an electrode interface.

The structure overall close the the electrode is known as the _double layer_ and features oriented dipoles and ions of the solution. The inner layer is known as the Stern or Helmholtz layer, consisting of _inner_ and _outer_ Helmholtz planes. Beyond this is the diffuse layer, whose thickness varies depending on the concentration of the electrolyte.

## Describe the different ways in which charging can take place in a capacitive system.

- Potential step
  -    Current has initial increase before decreasing exponentially.
- Constant current
    - Potential increases linearly with time.
- Voltage ramp
    - Current rises from zero with decreasing gradient and reaches constant value.
    - The behaviour prior to the peak reflects the electrode kinetics. The behaviour after the peak current depends on mass transport. 


## What is overpotential? 

Potential applied/potential under working conditions minus the electrode potential. 



Slower sweep rate makes a process more irreversible. Faster sweep rate increases current, as the species to be reduces is used up more rapidly, leading to a more significant concentration gradient. 


<sub>Note: there is a ~100mV zone around the standard potential for an electrode process where the statistical equilibrium of electrons means that there are appreciable amounts of both reduced and oxidised species. </sub>


## Name and describe the different possible electrochemical kinetics mechanisms outlined in the course.




## Electrochemical reversibility

Reversible - Nernstian equilibrium has been established.

A Randles-Sevcik plot of the peak current, $I_p$, vs. the square root of the scan rate, $\sqrt{\nu}$, should yield a straight line for a reversible process. The peak-to-peak separation should be $\frac{59mV}{n}$, where n is the number of electrons involved in the electron transfer. 

A good experimental determination of reversibility is to consider the Nicholson parameter (in this case, $\Lambda$). This is the ratio of the rate constant to the mass transfer coefficient. Values of 15 or greater suggest reversible (Bard and Faulkner) and values less than 15 suggest quasi-reversible, with irreversible close to zero ($\Lambda\leq 10^{-2(1+\alpha)}$). They correlate to the peak-to-peak separation.

For a reversible electrochemical process, the rate of electron transfer is so fast that increasing the scan rate does not lead the reaction to be charge-transfer limited. So, the peaks remain in the same place. 

Electrochemically irreversible reactions are entirely limited by charge transfer. The current-voltage behaviour approaches the Butler-Volmer equation behaviour.

If exchange-current-density is large, then only a small overpotential is required for significant net current flow. This corresponds to electrochemical reversibility. If the exchange-current-density is small, then a large overpotential is required, corresponding to electrochemical irreversibility (Atkins pg. 849).

### Why does peak current increase with increasing scan rate? 
Less time to reach Nernstian equilibrium, so diffusion layer thinner (?), which leads to a greater concentration gradient, increased rate of diffusion and larger current.  

## What is the usefulness of the Cottrell equation?
Potential time-step experiments can be used to obtain diffusion coefficients. Current response is t$^{-1/2}$ 


## What does the rotating disk electrode do?
Rotates the solution to promote convection and establish a maximum mass-transport-limited current. The higher the rotation rate, the higher the current. 

## What should an ideal CV curve look like for a capacitor?

A rectangle. $I = \frac{dQ}{dV}\frac{dV}{dT}$. For a ramped potential, dV/dT is constant. Resistance causes the non-ideal behaviour.

https://petermattia.com/cyclic_voltammetry_simulation/reversibility.html#:~:text=%E2%80%9CPractical%E2%80%9D%20reversibility&text=Most%20battery%20materials%20are%20%E2%80%9Creversible,of%20reversibility%20as%20practical%20reversibility
